Fire Emblem Heroes

I’ve been playing and enjoying Fire Emblem: Heroes since it came out a few weeks ago. While it’s fairly stripped down from a Fire Emblem perspective, the core mechanics are solid and matches feel like puzzles. There’s a variety of content types, with more being rotated in every few days. However, the game has two major flaws, issues which inhibit its long-term viability and undermine its “Fire Emblem-ness.”
First of all, given that a team consists of only four units, team composition often decides a match before it starts. It’s easy to end up in a situation where only a single unit can possibly deal damage to a given unit, which means that the “strategy” for that fight really consists on arranging troops to ensure that unit survives and can access specific enemies.
In and of itself, this is desirable, as in theory it means that a reasonably balanced team can face most scenarios while still having a few weaknesses. But, given that heroes are heavily stratified in overall effectiveness, have varying rarity and hidden stats, and generally are obtained through random “blind” draw, only very fortunate players can field optimal teams. For instance, the archer Takumi is not only superior statistically to other archers, his abilities allow him to avoid its major weakness without a tradeoff, making him far more valuable than the alternative archer heroes.
Second, the game’s current implementation of asynchronous PVP is garbage. For one, the scoring system relies on getting a “chain” of seven sequential games. Score is bolstered by your troop level, which difficulty you choose, and how many of your heroes survive the fight. Thus, the maximum score comes from beating seven “advanced” opponents in a row with a max-level party without losing a single unit. Even if you play perfectly, given the importance of team composition to a battle’s outcome you might literally be in an unwinnable fight. In the best of circumstances, given the limitations of the enemy AI, most matches come down to arranging your troops in ways that exploit the AI quirks more than strategically outmaneuvering them.
Even if the stars align and you manage a perfect seven game win streak, it isn’t enough to achieve the max score: your points are doubled in matches where you use one of the week’s “featured heroes,” most of which are distributed randomly. If you have one, they have to be leveled and ready, and you need to be able to build a team around them. Given that most of these heroes thus far have come from the week’s lottery, this isn’t trivial.
At its core, Fire Emblem Heroes is a fun but simple adaptation of the series, but ultimately it suffers from its free-to-play nature conflicting with what a Fire Emblem game wants to be. I’m glad Nintendo is branching out and exploring mobile, but I hope they eventually manage to find a way to make games that don’t settle for the mediocrity of the freemium model.
